Post-War National Movement (1945-47) The Second World War came to an end in Europe with the suicide of Hitler (30th April 1945) and subsequent surrender of Germany ( 8th May 1945). With this, the freedom struggle in India entered a new phase. The period during 1945-47 was a brief but crucial period of Indian National Movement. Even though it represented a climax of all political activities of the past decades, it was the Second World War and its impact which significantly shaped the course of events during this period. IMPACT OF THE SECOND WORLD WAR I Impact on Indians After the decline of the Quit India Movement, the Indian political scene was rather quiet. However, significant disquiet accumulated beneath the surface owing to the war time sufferings of the people- • Scarcity: Indian agricultural and industrial products were channelised in a big way to meet the demands of the Allied forces. This led to a sharp rise in hoarding practices and black markets, further giving rise to artificial scarcities and inflation. • Inflation: Scarcity of basic products led to sharp rise in prices. • Bengal famine: A cumulative effect of scarcity and inflation was the devastating Bengal famine of 1943 during which more than 3 million people starved to death. The condition of the rest of the country was not very different, though not ravaged by famine as such. • Failure of the British to repay Indians for their contribution: The Indian dis con tent was further accentuated by the British failure to pay back Indians for their contribution and support during the war years. Post-War National Movement (1945-47} 7.33 I Impact on British Government At the end of the war in 1945, Britain emerged victorious but also war weary, exhausted and internally wrecked: • War weary military: The European soldiers and officers in the army were desperate to go home after the tiring war years rather than staying on in India indefinitely, suppressing Indian people's struggle for independence. • Shattered Economy: Even though Britain was on the winning side of the war, its economic and military power was shattered. It would take Britain years to rejuvenate itself. Consequently, the British government was not in the mental and material position to run down another Quit India movement. In the face of wide spread opposition, it was becoming increasingly inconvenient to use Indian wealth for furthering British interests. Also, by now, India was no more a debtor to Britain. Instead it was Britain that owed India nearly 33,000 million pound. • Paucity of European recruits in the ICS: British domination of the ICS had already ended since the days of the First World War. By 1939, British and Indian officers had achieved parity. Besides the European officers were no longer men from aristocratic families who believed in 'White Man's Burden'. They were increasingly men for whom serving in India was just another job. The Second World War aggravated this problem. In the face of Indian hostility, India no longer appeared as an attractive option even for civil careers of Europeans. Continuous crisis management duties such as tackling famines and enforcing black outs had become a harassment and for the first time, the British entry into the ICS practically stopped at the height of the war in 1943. By mid-1940, the number of European ICS officers was reduced to a minority (587 Europeans as opposed to 614 Indians), thus marking a virtual end to classic imperialism. • Change of government in Britain: After the war, the wartime coalition government was replaced by the Labour Party government, many of whose members supported the Congress demands. • Changed Balance of Power: The war had changed the balance of power in the world. USA and Russia had emerged as the new world powers and they both supported India's demand for independence. Hence, the British power to control events was almost gone and the possibility of independence began taking shape. BRITISH Poucv AFTER THE WAR Owing to the above factors, the British Government was in no position to ignore Indian opinion and this led to a change in British attitude. At the same time, contrary to heralding an end to colonialism and imperialism, the Second World War had opened up the possibility ofNeo-colonialism 7.34 Modern Indian History A glimpse of British thinking after the war- 'A land and its people could still be effectively colonised and economically subjugated, even after conceding to them political independence, if their integrity and solidarity were disrupted and their weakness perpetrated through the setting up of separate, ineffectual puppet regimes.' Thus, the British policy after the war was guided by the aim of ensuring some sort of future in India by keeping the Indians divided in whichever way possible. Projecting themselves as pluralist people, they tried to magnify all the diverse distinctions among Indians along the lines of caste, religion, language and culture. The most successful British effort in this aspect was the communal card played by the British. From the very beginning, they had adopted the policy of using the Muslim League to counterbalance the Congress. The League was recognised as the only representative body of Indian Muslims, its demand for Pakistan was used to thwart every constitutional negotiation with the Congress. During the Quit India Movement, when all prominent Congress leaders were put behind bars, the League was practically allowed back door entry to take over some of the provincial ministries. Congress failed to counter this British policy due to the following reasons: • The Congress adopted a self-righteous approach towards communalism, merely disregarding or denouncing the claims that it was predominantly a 'Hindu' organisation. • The Congress made no serious attempts to win the support of the Muslim masses. • The use of slogans such as 'Vande Matram' and 'Ramrajya' by Congress leaders not only alienated the Muslims but also strengthened the position of the Muslim League. In the presence of active government patronage, and simultaneous failure of the Congress to contain it, the Pakistan Movement gained considerable momentum. The movement also acquired a substantial degree of popular support among the educated Muslim middle classes which began to see Pakistan as a panacea for all Muslim concerns-where the Muslim peasants will be free from Hindu bania and zamindari exploitation and Muslim businessmen will be free from the overbearing Hindu business houses. Such a situation allowed Jinnah to adopt an obstinate stand that the Muslim League will support the Congress in any negotiation with the British regarding the constitutional question only when the demand for Pakistan was conceded to. Jinnah refused to budge from this stand, even at the cost of weakening the national movement. This situation presented a win-win situation for the British not conceding the demand for Pakistan meant perpetuation of the British rule in India, whereas, conceding the demand meant an opportunity to place puppet regimes in divided india. DOMINANT THEMES DURING 1945-4 7 It is clear that communal tangle around the demand for Pakistan dominated the Indian political scene during 1945 and 1947. • Post-War National Movement (1945-47} 7 .35 Simultaneously there also emerged sporadic popular unrest directed against the British and their collaborators. Hence, the two dominant themes during this period have been described as under- 1. Attempts at a Negotiated Settlement 2. Post-War Popular Unrest I Attempts at a Negotiated Settlement Once the war ended (with the surrender of Germany in May 1945), the British started realising the need for starting a dialogue with the imprisoned Congress leaders in order to prevent them from taking advantage of the post-war hardships. According to Governor-General Wavell, the energies of the Congress were required to be directed away from agitation into "some more profitable channel, i.e. into dealing with the administrative problems of India and into trying to solve the constitutional problems". Flashback - the war in Europe ended after the suicide of Hitler (30th April 1945) and subsequent surrender of Germany (8th May 1945). The General Elections in England were in the offing and the Viceroy in India began formulating an offer, known as the Wavell Offer or the Wavell Plan to strike an agreement with the Congress. A conference was proposed to be convened with a view to opening talks with the Indian leaders. Consequently, on 14th June 1945, the government released the nationalists to enable them to participate in the Simla Conference. This marked the official end of the QIM. The Wavell Plan (14th June 1945) and the Simla Conference (25th June 1945) In an attempt to resolve the constitutional deadlock in India, Wavell went to England for consultations. On 14th June 1945, he announced through a radio broadcast, the proposals of the British Government, also known as the Wavell Plan 'to ease the present political situation and to advance India towards her goal of full self-government'. Through the same broadcast, he also announced the release of the top Congress leaders from detentions as a preparatory measure for negotiations with him. Further, Wavell also expressed his intention to call an All-Party Conference at Simla on 25th June to which he intended to invite Indian leaders representing various political parties Lord Wavell and minority groups. The main purpose of the conference was to deliberate on the formation of a new Executive Council at the Centre representing organised political opinion in the country. On the same day, Amery (Secretary of State for India) announced that the offer of March 1942 (i.e. the Cripps proposals) still stood in its entirety without change or qualification. Main components of the Wavell Plan were as follows: • Wavell proposed the reconstruction of the Governor General's Executive Council, pending the preparation of a new constitution. 7 .36 Modern Indian History • With the exception of the Governor-General and the Commander- in-Chief, all other members of the Council would be nominated from among Indian leaders (hence, the new Council would be practically Indian in composition). • The Muslims and the caste Hindus would be represented in the Council in equal proportion. • If formed, the reconstructed Council was to function as an interim government within the framework of the Act of 1935 (i.e. without being responsible to the legislature). • The Governor-General would retain his veto but he would not use it unnecessarily. • The portfolio of External Affairs would be transferred from Governor-General to an Indian member of the Council (except Tribal and Frontier matters which were dealt with as part of defence of India). • Representatives of various parties were to submit a joint list to the Viceroy for nominations to the Executive Council. If a joint list was not possible, then separate lists were to be submitted. Consequently, the government lifted the ban on the Congress, released the Congress Working Committee members and invited them along with others, notably the Muslim League to join in the Simla Conference. The released leaders had expected to find demoralised people, depressed by the privations of war and government repression. To their surprise, they were welcomed by ecstatic crowds waiting for their release. Even at Simla, villagers had gathered in large numbers, sitting atop trees and waiting for hours to catch a glimpse of their leaders! Simla Conference On 25 June 1945, the conference met as scheduled under the presidentship of the Viceroy. Though, for the next four days it made a sincere attempt to evolve a formula which could help the constitution of a new Executive Council, it could not succeed. Failure of Simla Conference: The major issue on which the conference failed to arrive at a solution was the manner in which the Muslim members of the Executive Council were to be selected. The League insisted that it alone had the right to speak for every Indian Muslim, and thus it alone should have the jurisdiction for choosing all Muslim members of the Council. Not satisfied with this, the League further demanded a communal veto by asking for a two-third majority in the proposed Council, instead of a simple one, on any decision opposed by the Muslim members. The Congress contested this claim. As a national body, it could not agree to be reduced to the status of a representative of 'caste Hindus' alone (meaning a body of upper caste Hindus). Instead, the Congress proposed to include two Congress Muslims out of its quota. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad (the then Congress President) and Abdul Gaffar Khan were present in Simla as Congress delegates. The demands of the League embarrassed many, including the Viceroy himself. Such a right to the League would have denied representation to the Muslims of the Unionist Party of Punjab, which had supported the British staunchly throughout the War. The Viceroy felt that one nonLeaguer representing the Punjab Muslims, a nominee of Malik Khizr Hyat Khan should be included in the Council. Yet the Viceroy abruptly abandoned British proposals and dissolved the Simla Conference, three days after it began. • Post-War National Movement {1945-47) 7.37 In this way, like many previous attempts, the Simla Conference too ended in failure in bringing about a consensus between the Congress and the League. The responsibility for the failure of the Simla Conference lay partly on Wavell and partly on Jinnah. Wavell should not have allowed the League to practically veto the whole plan. Significance of Simla Conference: This dissolution of the conference by the Viceroy implied, as revealed by subsequent developments, official recognition of the League's monopoly to speak for all Muslims and conference of the veto power onto the League for all future negotiations. The failure of the talks thus strengthened the position of Jinnah and the League, which was clearly manifested in the Election of 1945-56. Labour Party comes to power in Britain (July 1945) In July 1945, the Labour Party led by Clement Attlee won massive victory in elections and replaced the War time coalition government in Britain led by the Conser vative leader Winston Churchill. The election was a disaster for the Liberal Party as well under Archibald Sinclair. The new Labour government headed by Clement Attlee as Prime Minister installed an old fr iend of India, Lord Pe thick Lawrence, as the Secretary of State for India. The Labour leaders were known for their sympathies with the nationalist cause in India and had already committed themselves to giving India its Clement Attlee, Prime Minister of independence. Way back in 1938, prominent Labour Par ty leaders Britain, 1945-51 (Labour Party) including Clement Attlee, Stafford Cripps and Harold Laski had met Jawaharlal Nehru near London and had agreed to accept the Constitution of India framed by a Constituent Assembly duly elected on the basis of 'universal suffrage'. However, once in power, the Laborite approach was hardly pathbreaking- • On 21st August 1945, the Viceroy announced the holding of fresh elections in the approaching winters for the Indian Legislatures which were long due, both at the centre (last elected in 1934) as well as in the provinces (last elected in 1937). • On 19th September 1945, the Viceroy renewed the promise of 'early full self-government' for India, carefully avoiding the term 'independence'. • Discussions were also held with the elected legislators and representatives of the Indian princes for formation of a Constituent Assembly (conveniently bypassing the previous Laborite assurance of an elected Constituent Assembly on universal suffrage!). General Elections (December 1945) In the winter of 1945-46, the General Elections in British India were held to elect members of the Central as well as provincial legislatures. Election Campaign: The two issues that became the main plank of election campaign werethe repression of 1942 and the INA tr ia ls. In fact, as soon as t􀃨ey were released from jail, the Congress leaders had taken up the issue of official excesses during 1942. In their speeches, they 7 .38 Modern Indian History condemned the official action, recounted stories of repression in detail and promised enquiries. The rising crescendo of demand for enquiries gravely demoralised the services. The UP Governor, Wylie had himself confessed that such methods had been occasionally used which nobody could defend. The INA question taken up by the Congress most caught the imagination of the people. In its first post-war session held in Bombay (21-23th September 1945), the AICC adopted a resolution declaring its support for the cause. The Congress party took up the defence of the INA prisoners and lawyer-leaders such as Bhulabhai Desai, Tej Bahadur Sapru, KN Katju, Nehru and Asaf Ali appeared in court during the historic Red Fort Trials (Read more about INA trials later in this chapter). The Muslim League fought the elections with the straightforward communal slogan-'A vote for the League and Pakistan was a vote for Islam'. Election meetings were held in mosques and pirs (holy men) were asked to issue fatwas (directives) asking all Muslims to vote for the League. Choosing between the Congress and the League was portrayed as choosing between the Gita and the Koran. After such communal propaganda, the results were hardly surprising and the Leagues made a clean sweep of the Muslim seats. Election Results: Muslim League was in a favourable position. It had been able to attract the bulk of the Muslim masses thanks to government patronage and its religious cry of 'Islam in Danger'. The Congress was also at the height of its popularity, particularly so in anticipation of independence, yet it found itself helpless before the impregnable religious propaganda based on partly real and partly unreal communal differences. Congress Performance: • Indian National Congress emerged as the largest party: The Congress swept the polls in the General (non-Muslim) constituencies, securing 91.3% votes. • In Centre:It won 57 out of 102 seats in the Central Legislative Assembly. • In provinces:It obtained a majority and formed ministries in all provinces except in Sindh, Punjab and Bengal. Thus, the Congress ministries were formed in Assam, NWFP, UP, CP, Bihar, Orissa, Bombay and Madras. League's Performance: • The All India Muslim League was equally successful in Muslim constituencies, polling 86.6% of the Muslim votes. • In the Centre:It won all the 30 Muslim seats in the Central Legislative Assembly. • In the provinces:It grabbed 443 out of 509 Muslim seats in the provinces. • However, on the whole, the League suffered a heavy blow. Of the 11 provinces, it could form ministries only in Sindh and Bengal, that too with official and European support. The League lost NWFP and Assam to the Congress and also failed to dislodge the Unionists from Punjab. In the Punjab, though the Muslim League was the largest single party, it could not form a government and instead a coalition ministry was formed there of the Congress, the Akali Sikhs and the Unionists under the leadership of Malik Khizr Hyat, leader of the Unionist Party. • Post-War National Movement (1945-47} 7.39 Result Analysis: It must be remembered that the League's support base had hardly been tested in India. Elections were held on the basis of separate electorates under which only Muslims could vote for candidates for Muslim seats. Congress, which was ideologically committed to finding a common cause across the diversity of India's people, found it extremely difficult to outbid parties seeking the votes of a single religious community. Thus, the Congress party faced unequal competition in Muslim constituencies. Even the franchise was severely restricted-barely 10% of the total population. Hence, it is difficult to say what could have happened, had the elections been held on the basis of adult franchise, specially keeping in view future developments (Congress success in 1952 Elections, the League's reverses in East Pakistan and its failure to control events even in West Pakistan). Significance of General Elections 1945: • The Indian National Congress emerged as the largest party. • The League won all Muslim constituencies, and hence the elections proved to be a strategic victory for Jinnah (even though the party failed to win any other seats). • Even though Congress won, the League had united the Muslim vote and as such it gained the negotiating power to seek a separate Muslim homeland. • These were the last General Elections in British India; consequent elections were held in 1951 in India and 1970 in Pakistan. Cabinet Mission, 1946 Once the elections were over, the Attlee Government lost no time in starting negotiations with the leading parties. It sent a high-powered mission of three British Cabinet members to India to find ways and means of peaceful transfer of power in India. It came to be known as the Cabinet Mission. Members: 1. Pethick Lawrence (Secretary of State for India) 2. Stafford Cripps (President of the Board of Trade) 3. AV Alexander (First Lord of Admiralty) Objectives: • To find ways and means of peaceful transfer of power in India. • To settle the constitutional issue. Context to Cabinet Mission: By March 1946, India had reached a high point of ferment and the British had sensed that time was running out of their hands due to the following reasons: • Impact of the Second World War on India as well as on Britain (Mentioned earlier). • Impact of Sporadic popular unrest throughout the country (Mentioned at the end of the chapter). • Congress rule in provinces had also proved to be a big morale booster. • As per the British Policy of conciliation and repression, this was once again the time for conciliation. But after failure of Cripps Mission, there was little left to offer except independence. 7 .40 Modern Indian History • The British Indian government had realised that a settlement was necessary to avert another mass movement and to ensure good future Inda-British relations. By now, the British policy makers had realised that the British rule of the previous style could no longer be sustained. Hence, the overreaching aim of the British leaders now was to ensure a graceful withdrawal from India, peaceful transfer of power and good future Inda-British relations. The stage was now left to the three actors-the British, the Congress and the Muslim League to decide the future of India. Let us see what each wanted- British: the British wanted to leave behind a weak India, divided in whichever way possible to make way for the neo-colonialists. Views of Bipan Chandra Contrary to the above, historian Bipan Chandra is of the view that the British wanted to leave behind a united, friendly India that would be an active partner in the defence of the Commonwealth. A divided India would not be an effective defence partner and be a blot on Britain's diplomacy. In support of his view, Chandra quotes Prime Minister Attlee's Statement in the House of Commons (15th March 1946),"We are very mindful of the rights of minorities and minorities should be able to live free from fear. On the other hand, we cannot allow a minority to place a veto on the advance of the majority· The statement indicated a change in the British policy towards the Muslim League. Contrast this with the Simla Conference, where Wavell had allowed Jinnah to veto and wreck the negotiations. Hence, if continuance of rule demanded one stance, its withdrawal demanded another. Congress: Congress wanted a united India, one central government and minority safeguards to be worked out only after independence (which could range from autonomy to Muslim provinces to self-determination after secession from the Indian Union). Muslim League: The League wanted a separate homeland for the Indian Muslims. Cabinet Mission Arrives in India (24th March 1946) On 24th March 1946, the three Cabinet Ministers arrived in New Delhi and held prolonged discussions with the Viceroy and various Indian leaders for settling the constitutional question. These negotiations lasted over seven weeks and often ran into stalemates on account of Jinnah's demand for Pakistan and right to self-determination of the Muslims. Once again, the Congress and the Muslim League could not come to any agreement on the fundamental issue of unity or partition of India. Finally, the Mission decided to put forward what they considered to be the best possible proposals. They were included in a statement which they issued on 16th May 1946, and became known as the Cabinet Mission P lan. The Cabinet Mission Plan, 16th May 1946: The Mission came up with a rather complicated Plan which can be divided into three parts: • Examination of the scheme of Pakistan and its rejection • A long-term plan • A short-term plan (Interim Government) • Post-War Nat;onal Movement (1945-47) 7.41 Examination of the scheme of Pakistan and its rejection: Although the sympathies of the Viceroy and AV Alexander were with Jinnah, the Plan rejected the demand for a full-fledged Pakistan (consisting of the 6 provinces, viz. Assam, Bengal, Punjab, Sindh, NWFP and Baluchistan) on account of the following reasons: • The creation of Pakistan would not solve the problem of communal minorities as the percentage of non-Muslims living in west Pakistan would be 37.93% and those living in east Pakistan would be 48.31 % of the total population. • The mission fur ther examined an alternate proposal according to which Pakistan would consist of only the Muslim majority areas of these provinces. The creation of such a Pakistan would have necessitated a bifurcation of Bengal, Assam and Punjab going against all regional and linguistic ties and would have created immense economic and administrative problems, and yet would not have satisfied Jinnah (as he was opposed to the idea of a truncated and moth-ridden Pakistan). • There was no justification for including the predominantly non-Muslim districts of Bengal, Assam and Punjab within Pakistan (According to the mission, every argument that could be used in favour of Pakistan could equally be used in favour of the exclusion of the non-Muslim areas from Pakistan). • It would be injurious to disintegrate the transportation as well as the post and telegraph system of India. • The Princely States would find it difficult to join one of the two nations. • The two halves of proposed Pakistan would be separated by some 700 miles and communications between them in war and peace would depend on the goodwill of Hindustan (more importantly, the Mission believed that a united India could be an active partner in the defence of the Commonwealth). Long term plan: The following plan was recommended for a long-term settlement- • Union of India: There should be a Union of India, embracing both British India and the States, which should deal with the following subjects-defence, foreign affairs and communications (The Union of India meant a federation of the provinces and the princely states. One central government was proposed, controlling at least some specified subjects). • Full Provincial Autonomy:The provinces should have full autonomy. All subjects other than the Union subjects and all residuary powers should vest in the provinces (Hence, it proposed a very loose union of all Indian territories under a centre). The States would also retain all subjects and power other than those ceded to the Union. Provinces would be free to form groups with executives and legislatures and each group could determine the provincial subjects to be taken in common. • Groupings:The six Hindu majority provinces, viz. Bombay, the United Provinces, Bihar, the Central Provinces, Orissa and Madras would form Group A. The Muslim majority provinces in the north west, viz. the Punjab, NWFP and Sindh would form Group B. The Muslim majority provinces in the north east, viz. Bengal and Assam would form Group C. Of the Chief Commissioner's Provinces, three (Delhi, Ajmer-Marwara and Coorg) would 7.42 Modern Indian History join Group A and one (Baluchistan) would join Group B. (Hence, the provisions of 'full autonomy of the provinces' and 'groupings' were meant to give the Muslim League, if not the form, but the 'substance of Pakistan'. It was obvious that Group B and C would be under absolute control of the Muslims. The provinces were given the power to opt out of their respective groups by a decision of their legislatures after the general elections under the new constitution). • Constituent Assembly: A constitution making body should be set up immediately through indirect election (since direct election based on adult franchise would take a long time). For this purpose, each province was to be allotted a number of seats proportional to its population, roughly to the ratio of one to a million. The total number of seats thus arrived at for each province was to be divided among the main communities in proportion to their population and that the representatives allotted to each community were to be elected by the members of the same community in the Legislative Assembly (the communities recognised for this purpose were General, Muslim and Sikh). The representatives so elected along with the representatives of the Indian States would meet together in New Delhi as one body and form the Constituent Assembly. The Constituent Assembly would then separate into three sections-Section A corresponding to Group A and so on. • Provincial or Group Constitutions: All these sections would have the authority to draw up provincial constitutions and, if necessary, group constitutions and accordingly setup provincial legislatures and executives. • Union Constitution: After the group constitutions are settled, the groups would assemble together to settle the Union Constitution. Short-Term Plan (Interim Government): Since this would have taken considerable time, the Mission also proposed a short-term measure, the immediate formation of an Interim Government at the Centre, enjoying the support of all major political parties and with Indians holding all the portfolios, including that of the War Member. Merits of the Cabinet Mission Plan: • The chief merit was that the ConstituentAssembly was to be constituted on the democratic principle of strength of population and not on the principle of 'weightage'. • The idea of partition was discarded and an all-India Union envisaged. Defects of the Cabinet Mission Plan: • While the Muslim minority was amply provided for, no such protection was accorded to any other minority, like the Sikhs in Punjab. • The provisions regarding provincial groupings could be differently interpreted. Analysis: The Cabinet Mission Plan was an anxious attempt to put together a disarranged India under a nominal centre, with the communally segregated autonomous units almost as a prelude to 'balkanisation' (on the sole plea of overrated Indian disunity). In their hurry to leave the ground for the neo-colonialists, they failed to take note of several important details. Further, the Plan was supposed to be a compromise. It tried to placate the Congress with the rejection of the • Post-War Notional Movement (1945-47) 7.43 demand for Pakistan and tried to placate the League through the creation of autonomous Muslim majority areas. In the beginning, therefore, both the Congress and the League were quite inclined to accept the plan, particularly the long-term plan. Objections: Soon objections surfaced over the provisions for forming sections or groups of provinces. While the League interpreted them to be compulsory, the Congress wanted them to be optional since in case of compulsory grouping, Congress administered Muslim majority provinces of NWFP and Assam would be reduced to helpless minorities in their respective groupings. The Congress also opposed the absence of any.elected members from princely states in the proposed Constituent Assembly. The Sikhs were also considerably disturbed by the grouping system as they felt that they would be left without sufficient safeguards against the Muslim majority in Group B provinces. • On 6th June, the League announced its acceptance of the plan in so far as the basis of Pakistan was implied in the compulsory grouping system. • On 7th July, Nehru declared, "We are not bound by a single thing except that we have decided to go into the Constituent Assembly" (since the Assembly was meant to be a sovereign body that could amend the rules laid down by the Cabinet Mission). Failure of the Cabinet Mission: By end of July 1946, both the Congress as well as the League decided against trying out the Cabinet Mission Plan on two accounts-difference over the grouping system as well as Cabinet Mission's inability to clarify its stand and intentions over the grouping system. In fact, the mission deliberately refused to clarify itself, even when asked to do so, in the hope that the ambiguity may help reconcile the differences between the Congress and the League. On the contrary, it only deteriorated the matters. Positive Outcomes: Despite the above, there were some positive achievements. • The problem of the future of India which was until now a nebulous cloud had been brought down to the plane of hard realities. • It demonstrated that the Labour government in Britain intended to keep its promise of withdrawing from India as soon as possible. Wavell's Breakdown Plan: In May 1946, this Plan was presented by Wavell to the Cabinet Mission to deal with the fast-evolving political situation in India. It proposed a phased withdrawal from India, starting from the Hindu majority provinces. Thus, the Plan envisaged the withdrawal of British forces to the six Muslim Provinces while leaving the rest of the country in Congress hands. It also aimed at avoiding partition of India by itself proposing a partition of Punjab and Bengal and strike a blow to Muslim interests in both these provinces to deter the Muslim League from pursuing its agenda of a separate Muslim homeland. Although the overall plan was rejected, the partition part was incorporated in the Mountbatten Plan. According to some scholars, the Plan also reflected the desire of some British circles to make a 'Northern Ireland' out of Pakistan. Communal Carnage (beginning 16th August 1946) The failure of the Cabinet Mission so frustrated the Muslim League that it decided to act upon its post-election slogan, 'Lekar Rahenge Pakistan, Ladke Lenge Pakistan' (We shall take Pakistan by force). 7.44 Modern Indian History Direct Action Day by the League was observed on 16th August 1946, which was simply an invitation to violence. It may be noted that Direct Action was directed against the Hindus and not the British government. Communal carnage first began in Calcutta with the League's Bengal Ministry headed by Suhrawardy looking on passively if not actively abetting in it and resulted in widespread violent attacks on the non-Muslims. By the time the army restored order, 4,000 people had already lost their lives in what came to be known as the 'Great Calcutta Killings Henceforth, the Indian scene was rapidly transformed. Communal riots erupted in other parts of the country as well. In Bombay,more than 300 persons lost their lives in riots. In Noakhali and Tippera (eastern Bengal) more than 400 persons lost their lives, several women were violated. In Bihar, violence in Noakhali was promptly avenged, more than 7,000 were massacred. In Garhmukteshwar (UP) nearly 1,000 people were slaughtered. In NWFP, the butcher y in Bihar and UP was further avenged leading to communal riots carried out by Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs in Lahore Amritsar, Multan, Attock and Rawalpindi, killing more than 5000 by mid-1947. The Hindu and the Muslim communalists blamed each other for starting the violence and competed with each other in brutality. Flashforward: Communal carnage continued to blaze high throughout 1947 resulting in innumerous deaths, abduction and rape of countless women and desecration of religious as well as personal properties. The fratricide that continued in Indian subcontinent during 1946 and 1948 in the context of partition has few parallels in the annals of civilisation, in terms of the extent of human suffering and dehumanisation. Note: In the meantime, elections to the proposed Constituent Assembly were completed by now in all the Provinces. The Congress won 199 out of 210 General seats, the League won 73 out of 78 Muslim seats. Jinnah maintained that since Congress had support of 211 out of 296 members of the Assembly, the Muslims would be placed at its mercy. He, therefore, demanded a separate Constituent Assembly for Pakistan. Interim Government {2nd September 1946) In September 1946, in the midst of communal carnage, an Interim Government at the centrethe one proposed by the Cabinet Mission as a short-term plan, with Jawaharlal Nehru as its defacto head, came into existence. At the time of its formation, the Interim government faced similar challenges as faced by the Simla Conference-Jinnah insisted on a parity between five Hindu nominees of the Congress and five Muslim nominees of the League in such a government, apart from 1 Sikh and 1 Scheduled Caste members in it. The Congress had rejected such a demand claimed the right to include any number of Hindus, Muslims and others in its list of nominees. Once again, Wavell would have called off the talks, as he had happily done in Simla, had it not been for the widespread popular unrest that had begun to rage the country. Moreover, His .. Post-War National Movement (1945-47} 7.45 Majesty's government also felt that the support of the Congress was a prerequisite for their longterm interests and good relations in the future with India. Thus, Wavell decided to go ahead with the Interim Government, even if formed solely by the Congress a party that enjoyed the greatest influence over the public mind. Thereafter, the Viceroy asked the Congress to form the Interim Government, to which it responded in the affirmative. Accordingly, on 2nd September 1946, for the first time in 200 years, a fully popular Governor General's Council consisting of all Indian leaders took over the reins of Indian administration. Nehru was its first Vice President. Functioning of Interim Government: This Interim Government, however, was bound for a series of misadventures. It proved helpless, in face of the communal carnage, in moving the army led by a British Commander in Chief. Presided over by the Viceroy, it also sometimes could not withstand his vetoing power. Muslim League joins the Interim Government (26th October 1946): Communal fire kept burning and the possibility of a civil war unleashed by the Muslim League loomed high. The British now realised that the League, which was their own creation, had now assumed the shape of a 'communal monster which could not be tamed'. Under these circumstances, the British decided to go back on their policy of placating the Muslims. Accordingly, Wavell supported by Pethick Lawrence (the Secretary of State), persuaded the Muslim League to join the Interim Government, which it did on 26th October 1946. The League had been allowed to join the Interim Government without giving up the idea of Pakistan, or the plan of Direct Action and even without agreeing to the Cabinet Mission Plan. Why did the League join the Interim Government? • To wreck it from within as Jinnah publicly declared that the Interim Government was merely another front for the continuation of Civil War. • To get a foothold in the Government for furthering the goal of Pakistan. • To demonstrate that cooperation between the League and the Congress was impossible. Liaquat Ali Khan, the Finance Minister, continually hamstrung the functioning of other ministries. Once the League joined the Interim Government, it got sharply divided into two perpetually warring camps, which further reduced its position to a mere figurehead. First Meeting of the Constituent Assembly: Founded on 6th December 1946, the Constituent Assembly first met at New Delhi on 9th December 1946 and appointed Sachchidananda Sinha as its Interim President. On 11th December, the Assembly elected Dr. First day of Constituent Assembly of India. From Left BG Kher and Sardar Vallabhai Patel; KM RaJ·endra Prasad as its permanent President. Jurist Munshi is seated behind Patel BN Rao was appointed constitutional adviser to the Assembly. He prepared the original draft of the Constitution (A detailed draft was later presented by BR Ambedkar, Chairman of the Drafting Committee). Two days later, Jawaharlal Nehru moved 7 .46 Modern Indian History his famous 'Objectives Resolution' which declared the Assembly's firm resolve for an 'Independent Sovereign Republic' and later became the Preamble of the Constitution. Even though the League had joined the Interim Government, it refused to participate in the Constituent Assembly even though His Majesty's statement of 6th December 1946 upheld the League's version of grouping. Instead, the League demanded dissolution of the Assembly calling it unrepresentative (as Muslim majority provinces had not joined it). Jinnah now wanted Pakistan directly, and not through any Mission Plan. On 5th February 194 7, fed up by the disruptionist practices of the League, the Congress members of the Interim government sent a letter to Wavell with a demand that the League members be asked to resign. A crisis was in the offing. With the government thus torn asunder and major communities ready to slit each other's throat, clouds of gloom hovered over the entire country. In such a scenario, the only ray of hope was the popular unrest that demonstrated the capacity of the common Indian people to rise above their differences for the freedom of their nation. I Post-War Popular Unrest The period closely following the end of the Second World War was marked by a wide spectrum of popular initiative. The popular unrest during the period 1945-4 7 took the form of various urges and upsurges and can be broadly classified into two varieties. 1. Unrest which led to direct confrontations with the British administration. 2. Unrest which indirectly undermined British Raj through direct confrontations with its upholders-certain landlords, princes and capitalists. The popular upsurges were numerous in number and only the major ones have been mentioned below. Direct Confrontations INA Trials (or the Red Fort Trials, November 1945-May 1946) The first major popular explosion took place over the INA trials:The court martials of surrendered INA soldiers and officers who had earlier served in the British Indian Army. They were accused of having broken the oath of loyalty to the British Crown, and thus of having become 'traitors'. The first, and most famous, of the approximately ten trials, was held in the Red Fort in Delhi, hence known as the "Red Fort trials". Landmark Features of INA Trials: • INA Cause taken up by the Congress: In November 1945, the trials began in the historic Red Fort of Delhi. The cause of the INA men had been taken up by the Congress and made a main plank of its election campaign. Many Congress leaders appeared in defence of the INA prisoners. Hundreds of meetings were held throughout the country, demanding clemency for INA prisoners. The largest meeting was held in Deshapriya Park, Calcutta which was addressed by Sarat Bose, Nehru and Patel. • Post-War National Movement (1945-47} 7.47 ■ 5-11 November was observed as INA Week and 12th November was observed as INA Day. The Congress also organised INA Relief and Enquiry Committee which provided money and food to released men and attempted to secure for them some employment. • Issue turns Indian versus British: In the beginning, appeals were made for clemency to 'misguided men', but soon the INA men were hailed as most heroic patriots and 􀂳he government stand condemned. Henceforth, the issue became, mo􀂴e and more Indian versus British. The question of the right or wrong of the INA men s act10n was not debated. What was debated was the right of the British to decide a matter concerning Indians. • Priority coverage in newspapers: The trials were given priority coverage in newspapers, eclipsing international news. Pamphlets such as 'Patriots Not Traitors', were widely circulated. • Wide geographical reach: Another significant feature of the INA campaign was its wide geographical reach. Even though Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and_ the towns of UP and Punjab emerged as the storm centres, the agitation also spread to distant places such as Coorg, Baluchistan and Assam. • Participation of diverse social and political groups: The Muslim League, the CPI, the Unionist Party, the Akalis, the Justice Party, the RSS, the Hindu Mahasabha and the Sikh League supported the INA cause in varying degrees. The sympathies for INA men cut across caste, colour and creed! • Participation of the people took diverse forms:Some donated funds, others attended meetings, some struck work, others raised the demand for the release of prisoners. • Effect on the traditional bulwarks of the Raj: The most striking feature of the INA agitation was the effect on the traditional bulwarks of the Raj-the armed forces as 􀂵􀂶II as othergovernment employees (the police and the bureaucracy). Thus, even the trad1t10nal loyalist sections of the British Raj got submerged in the tide of INA sympathy. • The armed forces were the chief instrument of British Raj in India. Several armed forces men attended INA meetings, often in uniform. There were widespread strikes in Royal Indian Air Force (RIAF). The Indian Signal Corps at Jabalpur also struck work. The Commander in Chief himself confessed that a growing feeling of sympathy for the INA pervaded in the Indian Army. ■ The Police and the bureaucracy were the other two major instruments of the British Raj. They also began showing signs of nationalist leanings. For e.g., the Police force in Bihar and Delhi also went on strike. ■ A considerable number of INA men themselves belonged to families which had traditions of loyalty, which further fuelled local interest (For e.g., PK Sahgal was the son of an ex-Judge of the Punjab High Court). • Toe Three Upsurges: The rising nationalist sentiment over INA trials culminated into three upsurges. 1. On 21st November 1945 in Calcutta over INA trials 2. On 11th February 1946 in Calcutta to protest against 7-year sentence given to an INA officer 3. On 18thFebruary 1946 in Bombay when the ratings of the RIN went on strike 7 .48 Modern Indian History Pattern of Upsurges: The three upsurges followed a similar pattern-the upsurge initiated by a group (such as students or ratings), joined in by the city sympathisers, who were in turn joined in by sympathisers from other parts of the countr y. 1. Upsurge on 21st November 1945: The first of the INA trials, and the most celebrated one, was the joint court-martial of Colonel Prem Sahgal, Colonel Gurbaksh Singh Dhillon and Maj or General Shah Nawaz Khan . When the three heroes, belonging to the Hindu, Muslim and Sikh communities respectively and representing Indian unity were put on trial, a countrywide protest upsurged. There took place widespread meetings, processions and speeches demanding the release of the INA prisoners. Calcutta however, emerged as a storm centre. On 21st November 1945, on the call of the For ward Block, students marched towards the administrative quarters in Dalhousie Square. On their way, they were joined by members from the League's as well as the Communist student organisations. These students had tied the National, the League and the Red flags together representing the need for a united anti-imperialist struggle. The demonstrators were obstructed by the armed police and fired upon, killing a Hindu and a Muslim student. The killings immediately set the city on fire, and for the next two days the angry people repeatedly clashed with the police resulting in over 30 deaths and destruction of over 150 police and army vehicles. Understanding the significance of the agitation which 'cut across communal barriers', the government decided to step down by first announcing to try only those INA members who could be accused of murder and brutalities (December 1945) and then remitting the sentences passed against the first batch of the accused (January 1946). 2. Upsurge on 11th Febr􀀸ary 1946: In February 1946, when A. Rashid Ali of the INA was sentenced to 7 years in jail, the agitation resurfaced and ended only after two days, leaving 84 dead and 300 injured. 3. Upsurge on 18thFebruary 1946: Mentioned below. Royal Indian Navy Revolt (RIN Mutiny, 18thFebruary 1946) The RIN Revolt, a revolt in the armed forces had a dramatic impact on popular consciousness and remains a legend to this day. The RIN men had served abroad and were familiar with developments in other parts of the world. They thoroughly resented the racist behaviour of the British officers. They were also aware of the unrest in the country, specially over INA trials. On 18th Febrfiary 1946, their rising tempers suddenly frayed over the poor quality of food they were served and the ratings of HMIS Talwar in Bombay harbour struck work to protest against the following: • The treatment meted out to them including racial discrimination. • The arrest of BC Dutt (a rating) for writing 'Quit India' on HMIS Talwar. The ratings were joined by others in 22 neighbouring ships and those in the barracks on the shore. Once again, the strikers raised the National, the League and the Red flags together. They q: Post-War National Movement (1945-47} 7.49 also elected a Naval Central Committee with MS Khan as its head and drew up a set of demands including the following: • Release of INA prisoners • Release of all other political prisoners • Withdrawal of Indian troops form Inda-China and Java • Better food, better treatment • Equal pay to both Indian and European sailors alike On 20th February, the ratings in the barracks as well as those in the ships got surrounded by British forces. Soon there was exchange of fire and a gun battle began. By 22nd February the revolt had spread to all the naval bases in India involving 78 ships, 20 shore establishments and 20000 ratings, making it the most serious of all direct confrontations with the British administration of the time. The naval mutiny evoked unprecedented public sympathy, specially of students and workers and clashes got par ticularly bloody in Bombay. Karachi also emerged as a major storm centre. On 23rd February, however, Vallabhbhai Patel and Jinnah persuaded the ratings into surrender, bringing the mutiny to an end. Evaluation of the three Upsurges: Even though the upsur ges were short-lived and their participation was confined to a few sections and a few urban centres, they forced the British government to grant some concessions, such as first announcing to try only those INA members who could be accused of murder and brutalities (December 1945) and then remitting the sentences passed against the first batch of the accused (January 1946), and withdrawal of Indian soldiers for Indo-China and Indonesia. Attitude of Congress towards the Upsurges: Even though the Congress lauded the spirit of the people, it did not officially support these upsurges because of their tactics and timing. While the agitations were led by the Communists, the Socialists or the Forward Blockists, the Congress tried to diffuse the revolutionary situation. Some scholars accuse the Congress of being immersed in negotiations or even power hankering during the upsurges. On the other hand, historian Bipan Chandra is of the view that the upsurges were in fact an expression of the strong anti-imperialist sentiment that the Congress had fostered through its defence of the INA prisoners. As for negotiations, they formed an integral part of Congress strategy and the guiding maxim of the Congress was: 'Negotiations when possible and non-cooperation and direct action when necessary'. Attitude of Gandhi: As revealed by Gandhi's statements published in the Harijan in 1946, Gandhi was relieved that the ratings had listened to Sardar Patel's advice for surrender. Gandhi felt that the upsurges were badly advised. If the people had any grievances, they should have waited for the intervention by the political leaders of their choice. By not doing so, the people had been thoughtless and ignorant. 7 .SO Modern Indian History Other Direct Confrontations Several other direct confrontations continued to take place simultaneously such as- • In mid-February 1946, in Allahabad, over 80,000 demonstrated against the government decision to cut down the ration supplies of the civilian population. • In April 1946, in Delhi, Bihar, Bengal, Andamans and Bengal, there was a widespread police strike aided by the leftists. • In July 1946, the postal employees struck work for some time. In fact, the atmosphere remained much tensed throughout July in anticipation of an all India Railway workers' strike. Indirect Confrontations As stated earlier, such confrontations indirectly undermined British Raj through direct confrontations with its upholders-certain landlords, princes and capitalists. Spearheaded by peasants and workers, these confrontations mainly arose out of economic grievances and took the form of strikes against their immediate exploiters such as the landlords and capitalists and thereby weakened the hands of their colonial masters as well. Collectively known as the strike wave of the 1940s, these strikes generated a mood of defiance and selfconfidence all around. Peasant Agitation of the Warlis (Maharashtra, 1945-46): The Warlis (or Varlis) were the indigenous tribal or adivasi peasants who were in majority in the villages of Umbergaon, Dananu, Palghar and Jawahar Taluks of Thana district, Bombay. The Warlis had lost most of their land holdings to the moneylenders and were themselves reduced to the status of tenants or even farm labourers or wage earners. In times of difficulty, many of them had to give veth bigar or labour without pay. In 1945, the Warlis were first organised by the Maharashtra Kisan Sabha. Subsequently, lead by Godavari Purulekar, the Warlis began to strike opposing veth bigar and low wages. The landlords retaliated by terrorising them with the help of the police. Several violent clashes followed and the Warli agitation gradually petered out by the end of 1946 in the face of repression. Bakasht Peasants' Agitation (Bihar, 1946-47): This peasant agitation had grown over the past decade over bakasht lands, which the tenants had lost to zamindars during depression years (1929-37) by virtue of non-payment of rent which they continued to cultivate as sharecroppers. Apart from the rayati lands and the zirat lands, the zamindars also rented the bakasht lands. Rayati lands: were those lands which were settled by zamindars with the occupant tenants. Zirat lands: were those lands which the zamindars kept for themselves and got cultivated by agricultural labourers. Bakasht lands: were those lands which were rented to the tenants-at-will at varying rates. Post-War National Movement (1945-47) 7.51 The bakasht peasants continued to face ejectments as it was profitable to the zamindarsthe new incumbents had to pay fresh salami and higher rent to get possession. The zamindars also wished to circumvent the Tenancy Act of 1885 by evicting the peasants as the Act gave the bakasht tenants some occupancy rights if they had been in that position for 12 years. During 1937-39, the peasants had first resisted their eviction under the banner of the Kisan Sabha. In 1946, the issue caught fire once again when the Congress contested the elections in Bihar and promised to abolish the zamindari system. The zamindars felt insecure and tried to convert all bakasht lands into zirat by evicting the bakasht peasants in the hope that they would at least be able to retain the zirat lands. Such moves were naturally resisted by the peasants who once again protested under the leadership of the Kisan Sabha. The agitation led to violent clashes, arson, loot, injuries and even deaths. Flashforward: In 1947, the Bihar Bakasht Disputes Settlement Act was passed which had little effect. In 1948, the Bihar Abolition of Zamindari Act was passed by the Congress government after which the movement finally subsided. Travancore Agitation (1946): In 1946 in Shertalai-Aleppy region of northwestern Travancore, a strong trade union-cum-agrarian movement developed under the leadership of the Communists against the Travancore Maharaja and his Diwan. During this time, the Maharaja and his Diwan, CP Ramaswamy Iyer, were secretly planning to carve out an independent state of Travancore in anticipation of B"ritish departure from India. They wanted to impose an irresponsible government in Travancore, with all real powers vested with the Diwan to be appointed by the Maharaj. The Communists mobilised the peasants and workers and launched a massive campaign against this plan. Even the authorities unleashed forces of terror against their opponents, making indiscriminate arrests and inflicting torture. Punnapra-Vayalar Episode: On 22nd October 1946, as a response to state violence, the workers called a general strike in Aleppy area and also attacked the police camp at Punnapra. In response, the army was ordered to attack the workers sheltered at Vayalar. This culminated in a ghastly massacre of 800, which instead of terrorising people into submission only reaffirmed their resolve to stand against the state's independence move. Tebhaga Movement (Bengal, 1946-47): This was probably the most extensive of all post-war agrarian movements encompassing 19 districts of Bengal and 6 million peasants including a high percentage of Muslims. The Tebhaga Movement was a peasant movement that first began in September 1946 under the leadership of the Bengal Provincial Kisan Sabha. It was directed against the exploitative sharecropping system and the jotedars who took away a major part of the produce. The movement thus demanded three-fourths of the produce for the tillers against one-half (though some sources also mention that the demand of the peasants was to reduce the landlord share from one-half to one-third, and thus the name 'Tebhaga'). 7 .52 Modern Indian History Sharecropping: Sharecropping is a form of agriculture in which a landowner allows a tenant to use the land in return for a share of the crops produced on their portion of land. Jotedars: The Jotedars were the class of rich peasantry in the villages of Bengal that emerged as a new class of rural exploiters between the landlords (zamindars) and the tenants (rayats). The jotedars accumulated huge chunks of land (jotes) for which they paid rent in cash and which they in turn rented out to landless peasants on basis of sharing the crops in equal halves. The agitators raised the slogan 'Tebhaga Chai' or we want three parts out of four. The contest over crops soon led to angry outbursts and violent clashes. Despite communal carnage in Calcutta and Noakhali, Muslim peasants participated in large numbers. Women also played an active role. The movement, however, wilted away in the face of government repression, apathy of the Congress and the League, hostility of the rentier Bengali middle class and worsened communal situation and was finally suspended in March 1947. Telangana Movement (Hyderabad state, 1946-51): The Telangana movement that arose in the Telugu speaking region of Hyderabad state grew out of an exploitative agrarian situation. The peasants were exploited and abused by jagirdars on one hand and the Deshmukhs (past revenue farmers) and Patel-Patwaris (tax-collectors) on the other hand. The Deshmukhs and the Patel Patwaris had lost their job in 1860s when the Nizam's government started collecting the land revenue directly. Even though they were given substantial amount of land as compensation, their lust for land continued. Using their knowledge as revenue officials, they manipulated survey records and went on a land grabbing spree. They also began imposing a number of illegal taxes on the villagers and exacting vetti or free labour (also called vetti chakiri or begar). It was against these malpractices that the Telangana peasantry arose in revolt. They were led by the Andhra Maha Sabha, a communist organisation. On 4th July 1946, armed retainers of the Visunuri Deshmukh of Janagaon opened fire on a peaceful gathering of peasants and killed Doddi Komaryya. This incident forced the peasants to take to arms and start an armed peasant movement. Soon the Andhra Sabha and the Communist Party were declared illegal by the Nizam's government. Despite attempts at severe repression, the authorities failed to disintegrate the movement which continued unabated till the end of 1951, thus proving to be the most enduring and the most militant of all similar agitations. Impact and Significance of Post-War Popular Unrest: • The post-war unrest was an expression of the militancy in the popular mind. • It demonstrated that nationalist feelings had penetrated into hitherto untouched sections and regions of India. ■ The British Indian government could no longer rely on the Indian personnel of its civil administration as well as the armed forces to suppress a revolt in India. ■ The INA trials had well demonstrated that patriotic ideas had entered into the minds of the armed forces-the chief instrument of British Raj in India. Post-War National Movement (1945-47) 7.53 ■ The RIN Revolt, a revolt in the armed forces, had a liberating effect in the minds of the people. • The large-scale peasant and worker unrest all over the country also expressed the determined and confident mood of the Indian people. • When non-violent agitation was met with force, it exposed the brute force that stood behind the government, eroding its prestige as well as moral basis to rule India. • TI1e Popular Unrest provided immediate context for the announcement of Cabinet Mission, to find out ways and means of peaceful transfer of power. The popular unrest during the period 1945-47 demonstrated the enormous capacity of the common Indian men and women to stand up unitedly in the face of exploitation. With the Congress and the Muslim League tangled in power struggle, the mass discontent emerged as the only ray of hope for the nationalists. l. 2. 





Communalism, Partition and Freedom of India You are already familiar with the rise and growth of communalism in India upto 1940. It was in 1940 at the Lahore session of the Muslim League, that the highest communal demand, i.e. the demand for Pakistan was put forward. Henceforth, the 1940s formed the most crucial phase of communalism, culminating in the actual birth of Pakistan in 1947. PERIOD OF EXTREME COMMUNALISM (BACKGROUND TO THE DEMAND FOR PAKISTAN) The demand for Pakistan was the result of certain changes that took place in the Indian political scene after 1937. The period after 1937 witnessed elements of extreme communalism in the politics of both- the Hindu communal forces as well as the Muslim communal forces, with the British playing the role of a catalyst. In modern Indian history, this is known as the Communal Triangle-the British forming the base of the triangle, the Hindu and the Muslim communal forces forming its two arms. Let us examine the role of each of the three forces one by one. I Extremist Phase of Muslim Communal Forces Flashback Extreme Communalism, after 1937: the Muslim League performed badly in the 1937 provincial elections and decided to resort to extreme communalism. Demand for a separate state for Muslims now gained rapid momentum. The year 1937 was a turning point in the history of communalism in India. In the 1937 provincial elections, the League performed badly, winning only 109 out of 492 reserved seats and only 4.8 per cent of the total Muslim votes. The message was clear-the League needed to shed its elite character (dominated by princes and zamindars) and create a base among the Muslim masses. How was this possible? If the League took up the socio-economic grievances of Communalism, Partition and Freedom o f India 7.59 the Muslim masses, it ran the risk of annoying and thus losing the existing base of princes and landlords. Hence, the League decided to appeal to the religious sentiments of the Muslim masses. Jinnah and other League leaders raised the cry of 'Islam in Danger' from the threat of impending 'Hindu Raj', a cry which appealed to all Muslims, equally. They declared that the aim of Congress was not independence but to establish a Hindu Raj in India which would enable them to fulfil their real motive, i.e. domination over Muslims and extermination of Islam. Once the fear of Hindu Raj became entrenched in their psyche, it would be easy to convince them about the need for a separate homeland for Muslims, where they could practice their religion freely and fearlessly. Thus, Jinnah and other League leaders appealed to the Muslims to support the League, if they wished to save their religion from 'Hindu onslaught'. Such a communal propaganda was inevitably full of fear, contempt and bitter hatred. The demand for Pakistan clearly flowed from such politics of fear and hatred adopted by the League after 1937. Flashback: Finally in 1940, at the Lahore Session of the Muslim League, Jinnah propounded his twonation theory that India comprised of two nations-a Hindu nation and a Muslim nation, who were different economically, politically, socially, culturally and historically. That Muslims were not a minority but a nation and therefore they were rightfully entitled to a nation of their own (the press was quick to describe the resolution as a demand for Pakistan; some also began to call it the Pakistan Resolution). Thus, 1940 onwards, Muslim communalism was no longer based on mere fanning of minority fears but instead on an assertive-aggressive demand for a separate Muslim state. The above activities of the Muslim League headed by Jinnah transformed communalism into a mass force ultimately leading to the partition of India and formation of the separate state of Pakistan. I Extremist Phase of Hindu Communal Forces In 1937 provincial elections, the Hindu communalists had fared even worse than their Muslim counterparts. They also needed to expand their mass base and they too decided to appeal to the religious sentiments of the Hindu masses. The Hindu Mahasabha and Rashtriya Swayam Sevak Sangh were now led by more radical leaders such as VD Savarkar (who replaced Madan Mohan Malaviya) and MS Golwalkar respectively. Savarkar had publicly announced, 'The only way to deal with Hindu-Muslim schism was to insist that all India was Hindustan (i.e. land of the Hindus) and that the Muslims must reconcile themselves to the status of a minority community in a democratic state which orders life by majority rule.' Golwalkar's book We became the manifesto of Hindu Communalism. Thus, the Hindu communalists asserted that India was a nation of the Hindus and the Muslims should either leave or live as second-class citizens, let alone any privileges or special treatment as minorities. Such was the Hindu Communalists version of two-nation theory. They not only spread hatred for the Muslims but also bitterly criticised the Congress for supporting the 'enemies of the Hindus'. 7 .60 Modern Indian History By 1946-47, the language of the Hindu communalists became extremely vicious. As communal riots spread like wildfire and Congress was unable to stop them, the Hindu communalists tried to project themselves as saviours of Hindus. They condemned the Congress for their 'emascul ating' talks of non-violence and communal harmony and instead instigated the Hindus to retaliate and teach a lesson to the Muslims. In this way, Hindu communalism only reinforced the fears of the Muslims. At the time of partition, the communalised atmosphere provided a fertile ground for the growth of the Hindu communalists and their stand became even more aggressive. Now that a separate state for the Muslims had been carved out, they demanded that the rest of India be declared as a Hindu state. They tried to overthrow the state and capture power and when they were unable to do so, they became bitterly critical of the Congress government. Even Gandhiji was not spared and charged of treason to the Hindu nation. I Role of the British Forces The British policy of 'divide and rule' played a very significant role in the growth of communalism in India. Under this policy, Muslim communalism received wholesome support and patronage of the British government. Since the very beginning, the British had tried to divide Indians along the already existing fault lines of class, caste and religion. But it was the fault line of religion that proved to be the most potent; the British nurtured the Muslim League since its very inception and encouraged communalism to foster their own imperial interests in India. In October 1939, when the Congress ministries resigned over the Second World War issue and the party drifted away from active politics, the League moved in to fill the political vacuum and consolidated its position through Jinnah's manoeuvrings with the Viceroy (Linlithgow). In 1940, the League raised the demand for Pakistan to counter the Congress demand for immediate transfer of substance of power. The British too lost no time in making this demand as a major plank for delaying transfer of power. The British declared that so long as Hindus and Muslims do not come to an agreement on the manner of transfer of power, it could not be done. In 1942, through the Cripps proposals, the British government tried to accommodate the Pakistan demand through the back door (by giving the provinces the right of non-accession and secession from the Indian Union). At a time when the Pakistan demand had hardly been taken seriously by Indians, its serious consideration by British leaders gave legitimacy to the Pakistan demand and greatly served the cause of the Muslim League. In June 1945 at Simla Conference, Viceroy Wavell's attitude implied official recognition of the League's monopoly to speak for all Muslims and conference of the veto power onto the League for all future negotiations (even as its performance in the previous elections hardly sustained this claim). On the other hand, the British had perpetually raised questions on the 'national character' of the Congress. In March 1946, when the Cabinet Mission was sent, a change in British Policy towards the Muslim League was noticed. The British were of the opinion that the old policy of divide and rule would no longer be suitable. Instead they felt that the British interests could be better served in Communalism, Partition and Freedom of India 7 .61 future by a united India. They believed that a united India, friendly with Britain, could emerge as an active partner in the defence of the Commonwealth. Accordingly, on 15th March 1946, PM Attlee declared in the House of Commons, 'We cannot allow a minority to place a veto on the advance of the majority.' The statement indicated a change in the British policy towards the Muslim League. Contrast this with the Simla Conferenc e, where Wavell had allowed Jinnah to veto and wreck the negotiations. At the same time, it is also true that the scheme of Pakistan was kept alive and allowed entry through the backdoor, via the controversial provision of grouping. The failure of the Cabinet Mission so frustrated the Muslim League that it decided to act upon its postelection slogan, 'Ladke Lenge Pakistan' and 16th August 1946 was observed as Di rect Action Day by the League. What followed was a communal holocaust that spread like wildfire in the country and continued throughout 1947. In September 1946, at the time of the formation of the Interim Government, the British were in a dilemma whether to wait for the League and the Congress to agree on a plan or to go ahead with the Interim government with the Congress alone. Once again, Wavell would have called off the talks, as he had happily done in Simla, had it not been for the widespread popular unrest that had begun to rage the country. Moreover, His Majesty's Government was of the opinion that the support of the Congress was a prerequisite for their long-term interests and future good relations with India. Accordingly, on 2nd September 1946, the Congress was invited to form an Interim Government- a sharp departure from earlier British practice. However, in October 1946, i.e. within a month's time, the British went back to their policy of placating the Muslims. In the context of communal fire and the possibility of a civil war that could be unleashed by the League, Wavell persuaded the League to join the Interim Government (261h October 1946). Flashback: Thereafter, this government got sharply divided into two perpetually warring camps. On 9th December 1946, the Constituent Assembly first met at New Delhi. Even though the League had joined the Interim Government, it refused to participate in the Constituent Assembly and instead demanded dissolution of the Assembly calling it unrepresentative. On 5th February 1947, the Congress members of the Interim government sent a letter to Wavell with a demand that the League members be asked to resign. Clearly, a crisis was in the offing. PARTITION AND FREEDOM I Attlee's Announcement (20th February 1947) (Setting the time limit for British withdrawal) On 20th February 1947, the impending political crisis was temporarily averted by Attlee's announcement to the effect that- • The British would withdraw from India by 30th June 1948. · • Wavell would be replaced by Lord Mountbatten as Viceroy. 7.62 Modern Indian History • Power shall be transferred to more than one authority if the Constituent Assembly did not become fully representative, i.e. if the Muslim majority provinces did not join it. The statement had been made in the context of irreversible breakdown of government authority and in the hope that the date will bring the two warring parties together. However, the hope proved only illusory. Jinnah now knew that he alone will have to stick firmly to his demand of Pakistan. With regard to the announcement, the Governor of Punjab had warned that the announcement was a prelude to the final communal showdown with everyone out to 'seize as much power as they can, if necessary by force': His statement was soon proved right with the League launching a tearingraging campaign for partition of the country. It unleashed unrestricted violence in Punjab, Assam and NWFP with a view to bringing down the non-League Ministries in these provinces (to ensure that power is not transferred to non-League provincial governments here) and even succeeded in dislodging the Punjab coalition ministry led by Khizr Hyatt Khan. The League was clearly on a war path now. I Lord Mountbatten Arrives in India Mountbatten was sent to India with the task of winding up the Raj by 30th June 1948. On 22nd March 1947 Lord Mountbatten arrived in India and plunged straight into the constitutional problem with the objective of finding a solution on the basis of the Cabinet Mission Plan. He set about his task in the most zealous manner but he was soon convinced, particularly after talks with Jinnah, that there could be no solution to a united India. While try ing to push for the Cabinet Mission Plan with Jinnah, Mountbatten had concluded, 'He gave the impression that he was not listening. He was impossible to argue with ... He was, whatever was said, intent on his Pakistan.' Lord Mountbatten Hence, he began directing his energies towards an alternative plan based upon Atlee's Statement of 20 February according to which power could be transferred to more than one authority. Plan Balkan/Dickie Bird Plan/Ismay Plan This Plan was put forward by a committee comprising Lord Mountbatten, General Sir Hastings Ismay and Sir George Abell during March-May 1947, before Mountbatten presented the 3rd June Plan. It envisaged the transfer of power to several provinces (in accordance with Atllee's declaration which had talked about transfer of power to more than one authority if the Constituent Assembly did not become fully representative). The Punjab and Bengal Assemblies would vote on the partition issue and incase they voted in favour of partition, the various units thus formed along with the princely states rendered independent upon the lapse of paramountcy would have the choice of joining India or Pakistan or remaining independent. The plan was, however, quickly abandoned when it evoked severe reactions from Indian leaders, particularly Jawaharlal Nehru. The plan was also rejected by the League as it wanted a united Pakistan. Clearly, the plan came to be known as the Balkan Plan as it provided for balkanisation of India into several sovereign states and the dismemberment of Indian nationhood. The plan also came to be known as the Ismay Plan as it was General Ismay who had presented the plan before the provincial governors in Delhi. Communa/ism, Partition and Freedom of India 7 .63 Mountbatten Plan: Partition Plan (Also known as 3rd June Plan) The Plan • The Legislative Assemblies of Bengal and Punjab were to meet in two sections (representing Muslim majority districts and the rest of province) to decide by a simple majority whether the province was to be partitioned or not. In case they vote for partition, two dominions and two constituent assemblies shall be created. • It declared that transfer of power would take place by 15th August 1947 on the basis of dominion status to two successor states, India and Pakistan. • It provided for a referendum in the NWFP to decide whether the province would join India or Pakistan. It also provided for a referendum in Muslim majority district of Sylhet (Assam) to decide whether the district would join East Bengal or remain part of Assam. Sindh would take its own decision. • It provided for setting up of a Boundary Commission to demarcate boundaries in case partition was to be effected. • It proposed to introduce a legislation in the current session for transfer of power on a Dominion Status basis on one or two successor authorities which may decide, in due course of time, whether or not they wish to remain in the British Commonwealth. • With the lapse of Paramountcy, the Indian states would be free to join any dominion they liked, India or Pakistan (but this statement did not make clear the position of the princely states regarding the option of independence, leaving them to luxuriate in wild dreams of independent power!). Concessions given to Congress in the Plan Since Congress was making the bigger concession- of compromising with its ideal of united India, all its other demands were to be upheld by the Mountbatten Plan: • Princely states were not to be given the option of independence (though Mountbatten supported Congress on this, the provision in 3rd June Plan left scope for ambiguity) • Independence for Bengal was ruled out • Accession of Hyderabad to Pakistan was ruled out Indian Response The Mountbatten Plan was accepted by all political parties in India, although with great unwillingness. They had now recognised the inevitability of partition. By early 1947 itself, the Congress had begun to acknowledge it: • On 20th April 1947, Nehru had said in a public speech, 'The Muslim League can have Pakistan, if they wish to have it, but on the condition that they do not take away other parts of India which do not wish to join Pakistan.' • On 28th April, Rajendra Prasad had declared in the Constituent Assembly, 'It may be that the Union (of India) may not comprise all provinces ... For this, we must be prepared.' 7 .64 Modern Indian History Result The Hindu members of the Bengal and Punjab Assemblies decided in favour of partition. While East Bengal and West Punjab decided to join Pakistan, West Bengal and East Punjab joined India. • Referendum in Sylhet and NWFP went in favour of Pakistan. • Two Boundar y Commissions were constituted, one in respect of each province. Thus, the Mountbatten Plan became the basis of partition of India. Analysis of Mountbatten Plan • Divide India while retaining maximum unity: This Plan was drafted keeping in mind the demand of both the Congress and the League. Pakistan would be carved out, but it would be kept as small as possible to accommodate Congress demand of a united India. Moreover, since Congress was making the bigger concession of compromising with its ideal of united India, all its other demands were to be upheld (For instance, princely states were not to be given the option of independence). This was also important if Britain wished to retain the goodwill of Congress and persuade India to accept the Dominion Status and join the Commonwealth. Between India and Pakistan, Britain was keener on having India in the Commonwealth as its economic and defence potential was deemed sounder. • Do minion St atus: The Congress accepted Dominion status as the only means of ending the deadlock and taking charge of the worsening communal situation. It would also give some breathing time to the new administration as the British officers could stay on for a while and let Indian leaders settle in and take charge. • E arly Date, 15th August: Hence, the 3rd June Plan declared that transfer of power would take place by 15th August 194 7 on the basis of dominion status to two successor states, India and Pakistan. The early date of 15th August was fixed in order to secure Congress agreement to Dominion Status. It also allowed the British to forsake responsibility of the fast deteriorating communal situation. Mountbatten with Gandhi Mountbatten with Jinnah Communalism, Partition and Freedom of India 7 .65 I Indian Independence Act, 1947 On 4th July 1947, the Indian Independences Bill was introduced in the House of Commons by the Labour government of Clement Attlee and Governor General Lord Mountbatten after Indian leaders agreed on the Mountbatten Plan, the last Plan for independence. The Bill was introduced with the objective of transferring power to the people of India and received Royal assent on 18th July. Its main provisions included: • As from 15th August 1947, two independent Dominions shall be set up in India, to be known respectively as India and Pakistan. • The boundaries between the two dominions shall be determined by Boundary Commissions (headed by Sir Cyril Radcliffe, hence also known as Radcliffe Commissions). • The territories of Pakistan shall include the areas covered by the Provinces of East Bengal (including Sylhet district of Assam province), West Punjab, Sind, Baluchistan and the North-West Frontier Province. • The Constituent Assemblies of both the Dominions were free to make constitutions for their respective countries. • Pending the adoption of a new constitution, the existing Constituent Assembly of each Dominion would function as Dominion Legislature and each Dominion shall be governed by the provisions of the Government of India Act 1935. • For each of the new dominion a new Governor-General was to be appointed by the Crown. Further, the same person could be the Governor General of both (Mountbatten became the first Governor General of free India and Jinnah the first Governor General of Pakistan). • The Governor General was invested with adequate powers until March 1948 to issue orders for effective implementation of the provisions of the Indian independence Act 1947. • The Act terminated the suzerainty and paramountcy of the British Crown over the Indian states. Agreements between the States and the new Dominions were to be negotiated. • The Indian States were free to accede to either of the two new Dominions (the Act released the States from all their obligations to the Crown and they were now technically independent). • The Office of the Secretary of State was abolished and his work was to be taken over by the Secretary of Commonwealth Affairs. • The words 'Emperor of India' and 'Indian Imperator' were dropped from the Royal style and titles. The Indian Independence Act 1947 was acclaimed as 'the noblest and greatest law ever enacted by the British Parliament'. This Act closed the last chapter of British India and opened a new chapter of free India. 7 .66 Modern Indian History I The Disastrous 72-day Timetable From 3rd June to 15th August 194 7, i.e. in 72 days-both the transfer of power and the partition of the country were hurried through at lightning speed. From the Indian standpoint, this proved disastrous. According to some senior British officers (including the Commander-in-Chief Auchinleck), a minimum period of say a few years was needed to carry out a peaceful partition. The Plan provided for no institutional framework for resolving issues arising out of partition. Jinnah worsened matters by refusing to allow Mountbatten to act as a common Governor-General for both India and Pakistan as he wanted that position for himself. In December1947, the Joint Defence machinery also broke down. By then, Kashmir had already become a ground for militar y conflict. I Massacres- the Tragedy of Partition Partition of the country was accompanied by widespread Hindu-Muslim riots and massacres which comprised the tragedy of partition and were a result of several factors including the following: • Role of Mountbatten: Two of Mountbatten's decisions-early date of 15th August as well as del ay in announcing the Boundary Commission Award, played a key role in worsening situation in Punjab. As per senior British officers including Commander-inChief Lockhart (CnC of Indian Army from 15th August to 31st December 1947), the Punjab tragedy would not have occurred had the partition been delayed for a year. Further, even though the Boundary Commission Award was ready by 12th August, Mountbatten withheld the announcement until transfer of power, to forsake responsibility of further disorder. As a result, people living in the villages between Lahore and Amritsar continued to live in their homes thinking that they were on the right side of the border. Once the award was announced at the last minute, migrations took place in frenzy, often culminating in massacres. The officials too were busy arranging their own transfers rather than serving on duty which might have prevented the tragic killings. • Refusal to accept the finality of partition: Millions of people refused to accept partition long after it was announced, making it a last-minute frenzied affair. Even leaders such as Gandhi and Nehru believed the partition to be only temporary. • Belief that partition will be peaceful: Most unrealistically, it was simply assumed that the partition would be a peaceful one. Once Pakistan was granted, what was there to fight for? No preparations were made for transfer of population and no riots anticipated. Radcliffe Commissions: As st ipulated by the Act of 1947, the two Boundary Commissions were formed and were headed by Sir Cyril Radcliffe (hence the name Radcliffe Commissions). The divisions on both sides were carried out in secret and the final Boundary Awards were ready by 12th August. The Awards were, however, published only on 17th August to avoid further delays and disputes and gave details about the boundary demarcation line between India and Pakistan which came to be known as the Radcliffe Line. To day, the two sides of the Line in the west and in the east, continue to serve as lndoPakistan and lndo-Bangladesh Borders respectively. Communalism, Partition and Freedom oflndia 7.67 'ltr t.J lbhl 11111 ,,; -"""" -P:IWl:rl -P;>.1.IJCW'.o<l 􀀛r>t<!• -U,1)0 .. """"' ... "" -=c.h􀀇 lo Sh• cu.n-y l.,Ol:Vl4'􀀗.(if('U Goa l IRI itl Sikkim U1 f • .􀀘 11 I Map of the partition of India I Independence Day (15th August 1947) On the night of 14th August, the Constituent Assembly met and in a memorable speech, Jawaharlal Nehru called upon the members to take a pledge of service to the nation. At the stroke of midnight, independence was granted to both India and Pakistan. On the morning of 15th August, free India woke up to the dual reality of independence and partition. A new Cabinet, headed by Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of free India, was sworn in. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel became the Home Minister. Thus, was born a new nation, ending nearly 200 years of British rule in India. National Flag of India hoisted at the Red Fort 7.68 Modern Indian History Jawaharlal Nehru's 'Tryst with Destiny' Speech- This speech was made by Jawaharlal Nehru, first P rime Minister of independent India, in the Constituent Assembly on the eve of India's independence and is considered as one of the greatest speeches of the 20th century. 'Long years ago, we made a tryst with destiny, and now the time comes when we shall redeem our pledge, not wholly or in full measure, but very substantially. At the stroke of the midnight hour, when the world sleeps, India will awake to life and freedom. A moment comes, which comes but rarely in history, when we step out from the old to the new, when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation, long suppressed, finds utterance. It is fitting that at this solemn moment we take the pledge of dedication to the service of India and her people and to the still larger cause of humanity.' Prelim tCapsulel Run up to Partition and Freedom Events • j Year I Important Details Attlee's Announcement 20th February 1947 Mountbatten Plan 3rd June 1947 As per the announcement, the British would withdraw from India by 30th June 1948, Wavell would be replaced by Lord Mountbatten as Viceroy and Power could be transferred to more than one authority if the Constituent Assembly did not become fully representative, i.e. if the Muslim majority provinces did not join it. It declared that transfer of power would take place by 15th Aug 1947 on the basis of dominion status to two successor states, India and Pakistan if the Legislative Assemblies of Bengal and Punjab voted in favor of partition. It also provided for a referendum in the NWFP and Sylhet (Assam) and for setting up of a Boundary Commission. The Indian states would be free to join any dominion they liked, India or Pakistan. Indian Independence Act 1947 Independence Day Communalism, Partition and Freedom of India 7 .69 18th July 1947 15th August 1947 The Act was passed by the Labour government of Clement Attlee after the Indian leaders agreed on the Mountbatten Plan. Among other things, the Act stated the following- Pending the adoption of a new constitution, the existing Constituent Assembly of each Dominion would function as Dominion Legislature and each Dominion shall be governed by the provisions of the Government of India Act 1935. The Office of the Secretary of State was abolished and his work was to be taken over by the Secretary of Commonwealth Affairs. India woke up to the dual reality of independence and partition. Jawaharlal Nehru was sworn in as the first Prime Minister of free India. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel became the Home Minister. I Princely States and Partition As per the India Independence Act, the princely sates were free to join either of the two Dominions. In the context of States' People's Movements and the tactful diplomacy of Sardar Patel (Indian Home Minister), most of them decided to accede to India. Those who held back their decision for some time were the following: 1. The Nawab of Junagarh: Junagarh was a small state on the coast of Kathiawar. Its Nawab announced accession to Pakistan even though the people of the state wanted to join India. Finally, Indian troops occupied the State and a plebiscite was held which went in favour of India. 2. The Nizam of Hyderabad: The Nizam held back his decision as he was contemplating to remain independent. However, an internal revolt broke out in Telangana region following which Indian troops marched into Hyderabad and forced. the state to accede in 1948. 7.70 Modern Indian History 3. The Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir: The Maharaja also delayed his decision and decided to accede to India only after the irregular armed forces of Pakistan invaded Kashmir. I Congress and Partition Some scholars accuse the Congress leaders, including Nehru and Patel, of succumbing to the temptation of power and striking a deal with the British by which they got immediate power at the cost of country's partition. In reality, partition was not a result of personal failings of some leaders of the Congress party but a failure of the entire organisation. The independencefailure duality was nothing but a reflection of success-failure dichotomy of the anti-imperialist movement led by the Congress. Failure on two fronts: 1. The Congress had failed over the years to bring the Muslim masses into the national mainstream. 2. It had also failed since 1937 to stem the advancing tide of communalism. Once communal riots engulfed the country, the situation became intractable and the Congress leaders concluded that partition was the lesser of the two evils-either partition or civil war. Choice before Congress: Either Partition or Civil War: Failure of the Interim Government had virtually sealed the fate of the nation in favour of partition. The Interim Government had been reduced into another arena of struggle for Pakistan. It had no power to intervene in the provinces and when riots broke out in Calcutta and Noakhali, the Congress leaders could do nothing except watch the massacres as helpless onlookers. They had begun to feel that it was meaningless to hold office in such circumstances and an immediate transfer of power even at the cost of partition would at least give them real power to restore order and bring an end to such killings. Choice before Congress: Either Partition or Balkanisation: Another choice facing the Congress leaders was 'partition versus balkanisation'. If they chose partition, the British government was willing to uphold all other stands of the Congress, including eliminating the option of independence to princely states, thus ruling out the possibility of balkanisation of the country. Hence, the choice was clear-independence to princely states was a graver threat to Indian unity than Pakistan was. Choice before Congress: Either Secular body or Hindu body: Jinnah demanded that the Muslim League be recognised as the sole representative of Indian Muslims. Accepting this meant Congress was required to close its doors for Muslims and effectively turn non-secular. Secularism was among the cherished goals of the Congress leaders with which they were not willing to part. Moreover, turning non-secular would have also betrayed the Muslim members of the Congress as well as the Indian people and their future. The Communal Tangle: In its final years, the communal tangle was such that the more you tried to solve it, the more badly tangled the threads became. Every time the Congress made a concession, Jinnah pegged his demand a notch higher. Every time the Congress yielded, more .. Communalism, Partition and Freedom of India 7 .71 and more persons joined the ranks of the Muslim League, impressed by their success. Hence, every round of concession only strengthened the foothold of the communal forces-both Hindu as well as Muslim. The Hindu communalists lost no time in championing themselves as the only saviours of Hindu interests while accusing the Congress of emaciating the Hindus in the name of communal harmony! What was needed was not appeasement but an all-out struggle against co mmunalism. The Congress failed to understand this communal logic and failed to formulate a long-term strategy to counter the forces of communalism. Accepting Partition-A Final Act of Surrender: Though Congress leaders refused to accept Jinnah's two-nation theory and give up their secular ideology, they made several significant concessions to the League. • In 1942, at the time of Cripps Mission, autonomy for Muslim majority provinces was accepted. • In 1944, in his talks with Jinnah, Gandhi recognised that the Muslim majority provinces would have the right to self-determination. • In 1946, at the time of Cabinet Mission Plan, Congress was willing to accept all optional provisions such as Muslim majority provinces (groups Band C) would set up a separate Constituent Assembly if they wished. Congress only opposed compulsor y grouping which would force NWFP and Assam into groups they may not wish to join. • In December 1946, when the British Cabinet upheld the League's version of grouping, Congress silently accepted. • In February 1947, after Attlee's announcement, Nehru appealed to Lia quatAli Khan for cooperation. Thus, accepting partition under the 3rd June Plan was final act of surrender before Jinnah's unshakeable demand for a separate Muslim state. At the same time, it must be remembered that even though the nationalist leaders accepted partition, they did not accept the two-nation theory and strove to establish a secular state in independent India. Most ironically, even Jinnah tried to roll back his two-nation theory once Pakistan was created. On 11th August 1947, he declared in the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan, 'You may belong to any religion or caste or creed- that has nothing to do with the business of the state .' He was in vain tr ying to put back in the bottle the genie ha had released to practice communal politics. In the words of Bipan Chandra: 'The fact is that communalism is basically an ideology which could not have been and cannot be appealed, it had to be confronted an opposed. The failure to do so was the real weakness of the Congress and the national movement.' I Gandhi and Partition The prospect of partition was immensely distressful to Gandhi. He is believed to have felt disappointed with not only Jinnah for his obduracy but also with his disciples, Nehru and Patel for their alleged lust for power. But he felt most betrayed by his people-the masses that had 7.72 Modern Indian History been communalised beyond repair. It was not just the Muslims but also the Hindus and the Sikhs who now wanted partition. Gandhi remarked (in a prayer meeting, 4th June 1947), 'The demand has been granted because you asked for it. The Congress never asked for it ... But the Congress can feel the pulse of the nation. It realised that the Khalsa as also the Hindus desired it.' When the Socialists appealed to Gandhi to start a struggle on his own for unity of the nation as he was willing to do in 1942, Gandhi refused. For what was a mass leader without the masses behind him? He could 'instinctively feel what is stirring in the hearts of the masses ... and give a shape to what was already there.' In 1947, he confessed that 'Today I see no sign of such a healthy feeling. And therefore, I shall have to wait until the time comes'. However, the time never came. Things were moving way too fast, as the partition was announced on 3rd June to be implemented on 15th August. At this juncture, it is believed that Gandhi wished to end his life, yet he stood up heroically, keeping the flame of united India ablaze in his heart and the mantra of 'Ekla Chalo' on his mind. On 14th June 194 7, Gandhi walked bravely into the AICC meeting and advised the Congressmen to accept partition as an unavoidable necessity but not to accept it in their hearts and continue to strive to reverse it later, once passions had subsided. He walked barefoot through the villages of East Bengal and Bihar, trying to comfort the Muslims by his presence. He tried to fight the senseless communal frenzy single handedly by persuading people to give up arms and by threatening them with fast- 'One man boundary force' as he was famously called by Mountbatten. Mahatma Gandhi, the Father of Our Nation, spent the Independence Day, fasting and spinning in a locality of Calcutta, worst affected by communal riots. On 30th January 1948, he was shot dead while on his way to evening prayer ground at Birla House (now Gandhi Smriti) by Nathuram Vina yak Godse, a Hindu fanatic. 'Light has gone out of our lives, and there is darkness everywhere', mourned Jawaharlal Nehru along with millions of others. I Maulana Abul Kalam Azad and Partition Maulana Azad served as the Congress President during 1940-46. He was an outspoken opponent of Mohammad Ali Jinnah and Partition and represented a collective will of Muslims to co-exist in a secular India. In a press statement on 15th April 1946 as Congress President Maulana had said, 'I have considered from every possible point of view the scheme of Pakistan as formulated by the Muslim League ... Considering the scheme in all its aspects I have come to conclusion that it is harmful not only for India as a whole but for Muslims in particular. And in fact, it creates more problems than it solves.' Maulana Abut Kalam Azad Communalism, Partition and Freedom of India 7 .73 As is evident from his autobiography, Indian Wins Freedom (1957), his basic argument against partition was that it would be a loss to Muslims on both sides and give birth to two nations that would be in constant confrontation with each-other. 'The two countries will focus on military, and society will not develop ', he had aptly predicted. In his attempts to change Jinnah's rigid attitude, MaulanaAzad had to face stern criticism and even outright insults. He was accused of being a 'Show-boy President', appointed to hood-wink the world. Azad, however, continued to proclaim his faith in Hindu-Muslim unity. I Britain and Partition The British could have kept India united, only if they had the determination to do so. It demanded of them proactive intervention in that direction while putting down the communal forces with a firm hand. However, they preferred to take the easy way out by trying to mediate between the Congress and the League in the hope of juicing out some goodwill for themselves. In the final analysis, the partition of India was primarily the result of determined efforts of the Muslim League from 1940 onwards to obtain a separate sovereign state for the Indian Muslims. Through a combination of political and direct actions, the League, under the astute leadership of Jinnah (known as Quid-e-Azam or Great Organiser), was able to force the situation into a deadlock, from where partition was the only escape. Throughout this process, the League received active patronage from the British who were interested in using the communal card to counter the national movement. The Congress, on its part, not only failed to appeal to the Muslim masses but also failed to understand the communal logic and devise a long-term strategy to combat the communal forces. On 15th August, as India awoke to the dual reality of partition and freedom, the gloom of bloodshed sat heavily on the shoulders of young India. What had been thrown off was the foreign yoke, while years of backwardness and inequality now weighed on the land and the long haul had just begun. I Opinions Jawaharlal Nehru: 'I suppose it was the compulsion of events and the feeling that we wouldn't get out of that deadlock or morass by pursuing the way we had done; it became worse and worse. Further a feeling that even if we got freedom for India with that background it would be very weak India, that is federal India with far too much power in the federating units. ..A nd so we accepted it (partition) and said, let us build up a strong India. And if others do not want to be in it, well how can we and why should we force them to be in it?' Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel: 'I felt that if we did not accept partition, India would be split into many bits and would be completely ruined ... We would not have had one Pakistan but several.' 
